 Where marriage is made and love lasts, welcome to Marriage Unhindered with Doug Hinder. Relationship problems? No problem. Give us a call. 888-914-9149. Need a second opinion? That's 888-914-9149. This is Marriage Unhindered. Here's your host, Doug Hinderer. Hey, welcome to the show. Good to have you here. Good to be with you. And I'll let you know that little lead in about if you need a second opinion. Give us a call. Today you get a second opinion because it's Thursday, which means Monica's here. That was good. That was good. That's the name for a good band. If we started our own band, we could call ourselves in sync. Yep. Maybe it was trademark. I mean, that would be... I don't know that I ever listened to any of the in sync songs. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. You did. You did. You're not older girls. You're not older girls. You're not older girls. That was even before your time. That's more of like Emily. That's all right. Yeah. Okay. All right. Yeah. Monica's here. License Clinical Professional Counselor. All around great, daughter. And this is where we focus on parenting issues, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. So here's the question for today. Oh, let's do... Yeah, let's listen. What one childhood personality trait is the most predictive of happiness as an adult. What's the one thing if your kid has it increases the odds of them having a happy, well-adjusted adulthood, right? If you guessed grade point average or popularity or emotional stability or not throwing tantrums, you'd be wrong. Actually, it's conscientiousness, which you knew, I know you knew that, which is composed of two things, honesty and self-control. So today we're going to take a look at an article written by Dr. Leonard Sachs on this topic. It was in the September 2nd edition of the Institute for Family Studies blog that's out there. And so if you have children or grandchildren and you know someone who does, pay attention because this is important stuff. This is how you can actually set your child up for success, all right? This content of the show is strictly for educational purposes, not a replacement for mental health diagnosis. A stream of calling in the show does not establish a therapist-patient relationship with either myself or Monica. Are you with me, girl? I'm here. I'm here following a lot. I'm here following a lot. Late night last night. You seem a little tired. Well, it's been a heavy week. It's been a heavy week. It's been a heavy week. The country's experienced a heavy week. Kind of a tough thing. Yeah. And Monica and I were talking before the show that she actually was a ten of the same junior college with Charlie, the same age. You didn't know him, but you followed him since he was 18. So you feel like you got this pretty close relationship with him and grew up in the same town. Yeah. Well, and I think, you know, it's interesting. I've thought a lot about people's responses to this tragedy, to a lot of the tragedies. And I think that we're not really going to ever course correct as a society until we can return to valuing human life. No. You know, so if your reaction to this isn't one of, I don't know, some type of grief or sorrow or disgust or confusion even, you know, that's kind of a challenge to really think about how we're viewing human life. Because we like to categorize people and be like, well, they're right or they're left or they're this or they're that or they're a politician, so then they're for or they're this or they're that. And at the end of the day, they're, they're a human being. Human being. Right. Exactly right. And I think and we went, we're not going to go down this road. But if we don't value human life in the womb, it's a lot easier to not value it once it's out of the one, you know, and yeah, it's a desensitized culture we've created. Well, I know, you know what we live in the Chicago land area, but, you know, the number one lead story almost every night is about shootings every morning. We've got people got shot overnight two weekends ago over 58 people were shot in one weekend. Yeah, that's a holiday weekend, three day weekend, 58 people. So it's just, it's just said, said commentary and yeah, we should all be sad and we should all pray a lot and we should all examine ourselves, right? We change the world by changing ourselves. Right. One person at times. With that said, let's put this show into the protection of our blessed mother, undo her of knots, who knows what it is to suffer a lot. And in fact, tomorrow's show, we're going to talk about suffering and marriage. So we're going to keep the suffering thing going. I guess it seems like the right week to do that week and a half. Please join me in the name of the Father and the Son and Holy Spirit. Amen. Blessed Mother, take in your hands and knots and affect married couples and with your fingers of love and grace, undo these knots for the glory of God. Make married couples with your grace, renew their Sacramento covenant, increase God's love in them and strengthen their bond of peace with their children. Amen. Always with joy and the gift of your blessing. Amen. All right. So before we get to that, I mean, it's 9-11. We should say something about 9-11 and remember the folks who have died, who died in the towers and all the first responders who died. Do you remember where, how old were you, Monica? Do you remember? I was probably in kindergarten. Oh, is that right? Yeah, I remember being at school when it was announced. Is that right? Yeah. And then did it close school? Did my mom have to come get you? Yeah, to my memory, we were sent home and I remember the TV just kind of kept replaying the same images. Yeah. So, I was, I mean, I got down to work. I was working downtown Chicago. Up there, got in and all of a sudden people like, you know, all the stuff's going on, turned the TV on and it's always going on. And I reported the CEO. I was running the HR department. But CEO is out of town. I'm like, what do we do? Do we send people home? Do we keep, how do you handle something like this, unprecedented? Talk with the CFO and together like now, we were closing the office for everybody home, which we did. And the HR guy kind of figured it was my job to make sure everybody could get out of there safe and they all were able to get home and everything. So, I was the last one to leave the building. They left around noon walking through downtown Chicago on a warm fall day and it was empty. It was eerie. It goes town here. Not a single person. And I remember getting home and the kids were there and maybe a mother and I talking about, what do we do with this? Do we put the TV on or do we not? How do we handle this with the little kids, right? We handle it with you and yet two younger brothers at that point. And what do we do with that? Tough, tough time and a real black eye for our country. But so, anyway, let's dedicate this show to the people. And so everyone who saw their lives. And I actually think that this is a really good topic because I think as we talk about kind of the tragedies of our world and we sit with and wrestle with the heaviness of this time, I think the one consolation or the hope is the youth, right? And if we raise conscientious children and loving and good children who are kind, we're going to start to erase or overcome some of our darkest times. Exactly, right? Which is why some of the more liberal states are trying to take over control of the kids, right? Given some states that have proposed legislation that they will take your child out of your home if you don't promote the LGBTQ agenda to your own biological children, even if you're homeschooled. So, you're righteous. So even the bad guys know that the future is with the youth. And they're trying to co-op the youth and as parents, we've got to make sure that that doesn't happen and that we give them the right set of values. So. All right, so here we go. Here's the question. Do you struggle with a child who lies? I don't believe you ever told us the lie. Did you? Many. I think I did when I was little, yeah. Probably, yeah. Or it makes excuses for bad behavior. Definitely. I know you never had bad behavior. No, it was always the boys. Always the boys. Do you have a child that seems to lack self control? You know, it doesn't get the chores done on time or without being reminded or doesn't seem to be able to turn off the TV or quit playing the computer game, right? Or get his homework started on time. So you have a Pacific. Do you have a Pacific challenge with a child that comes down to one of these two areas of honesty or self control, right? Well, so it gives us a call. We'll talk about a triple eight 9149. That's our Catholic order of forestry's call line. 8889149494. You can email me at Doug at relevantradio.com. All right. So here we go. So this article I Leonard Sachs and Leonard's a pretty well-known guy. So practicing family physician. He's a psychologist and he's written a number of books about parents. And I think his most recent one is the collapse of parenting, right? He's got and he's written a lot of stuff about screens, et cetera. Very bright guy. I know he was, I think Jordan Peterson interviewed him a couple times for his podcast stuff. So all right. So here we go. So he starts off consciousness is declining among young Americans. Why? What, let's say, starts off, what personality traits during childhood adolescence best predict an individual's health, wealth and happiness many years later. Say at age 35. Is it the great point average popularity? Right, center of center. He says, nope. The traits that best predict future well-being are actually honesty and self-control. Okay. So he look at those two building blocks, two foundational blocks, right? So he says, psychologists combine honesty and self-control into a single personality trait called conscientiousness. Says he devoted two chapters of his book, the collapse of parenting, deciding many longitudinal studies conducted over decades showing that children and teens who are high in conscientiousness go on to enjoy better health, wealth and happiness as adults. The bad news is there's been a dramatic decline in consciousness among teens and young adults over the past 10 years. So you know, anything that is dramatic in 10 years, I mean, that's significant. I mean, 10 years is not a long period of time. Yeah, for some sort of a cultural shift away from things that have been taught forever, like honesty and self-control. All right. So he says, young people are much less honest and self-controlled than they were just a decade ago. They're also more neurotic, but you see a lot in your practice, I know. And they're also, which means they're also less emotionally stable. They are less agreeable, so more, you know, contancress and less outgoing, more introverted. Okay. So burn Murdoch. I don't know who that is. Documents an equally dramatic drop in the portion of young people who say they can make plans and follow through. So you find people that they can't do that anymore. And a corresponding rise in the proportion of young people who say that they are easily distracted and careless. Yeah. And then he says, this is really bad news. This is bad news. Yeah, I think we've kind of created an environment that can, without kind of guidelines or controls, boundaries with our kids, kind of promote those negative qualities or traits if we're not careful, right? So I have a feeling this conversation is kind of probably going towards talking about kind of screens or social media to some degree, because that's been a big change in the past decade as I'm thinking about, well, what are the big changes in our society that have been contributing to this? But I think that there's so many amazing benefits to screens and to social media. And we need boundaries and rules and law and order around things that we're kind of fumbling through as a society to figure out how do we manage this? It's so new. Right. Right. And with any like new thing, there's casualties along the way. Right. There's things that go bad. So I think you're right. We'll get that out. We'll get to the screens because you know how I feel about that. But he also is highly critical of our educational system. So let me just say this a little bit for those whose kids are out there, especially if they're in, well, just about any school system. Maybe this should not come as a surprise. He says, American educators used to understand that teaching character in virtue were the top priorities in education, but not today. Over the past 24 years, he says, I have visited 500 schools. And I can tell you that a concern for moral and spiritual values is not the top priority at most public schools or most secular independent schools that I've seen. Okay. So it's not, it's not being taught in the schools. Okay. Maybe if you got a Catholic school, perhaps, but in most schools, virtues are not being taught. Okay. So he goes on to establish what we have known and what the church has taught for about 2000 years. Parents are the first teachers of virtues. He says, I've been a family physician in the United States for 36 years now. And I've witnessed firsthand what I call the collapse of parenting. Okay. Because I now commonly see kids treat their parents with defiance and disrespect in ways they were unthinkable when I was a young doctor 30 years ago. So what or who is the blame for this collapse in conscientiousness? Burn Murdoch suggests that smartphones and streaming services seem likely culprits. But SAC says, but I'm not persuaded that smartphones alone are the blame. No. Young people who demonstrated decline in conscientiousness are digital natives. The first generation to grow up with cell phones in their pockets. But correlation is not causation. Says I'm not defending smartphones. In fact, I've been writing about the dangers of smartphones for many years. Okay. I think it's reasonable to believe that smartphones can lead to distraction and social isolation. However, distraction is not equal dishonesty, right? So let's just just take a short. Little detour to smartphones. Some of the dangers of smartphones. I boy, I've highlighted about 15. Oh gosh. Maybe just give us a quick. A quick 15. You want to read all 15? It's the smallest. Okay. So here's some of the dangers. Pornography and sexualized media. Mm-hmm. Okay. Obviously, right? Violent and degrading content. Mm-hmm. Okay. Apps and games designed to hook attention to triggered dopamine production, right? To help children develop compulsive habits. Dopamine hits from the notifications, right? It fostered dependency. Social pressures like peer comparison, especially difficult for women, right? Cyberbullying. That's been well documented. Phenomomo, which means fear of missing out. Yes, you knew that. I have it. You have it. Well, I know a good therapist can help you with that. And he's also a compassionate and caring father. Erosion of virtue and conscience, right? Lies, gossip, crude humor, spread, leaves the online. Yeah. Children learn pretty easily to hide or deceive their parents about their online activities. And screens can dull sensitivity to God's voice, right? Because you're just so busy, there's God only speaks in the quiet, right? Mm-hmm. Distraction from family meals, conversations, a playtime stuff from kids who are absorbed in their devices. They risk value-indiginal approval over real life love and friendships. Look, kids encounter, loss of innocence as well, right? Because they get exposed to some pretty adult stuff at a pretty early age. Even just real stuff, right? So the whole thing with Charlie, right? Yeah, I mean, those videos should not. It continues to blow my mind that we can watch videos of someone dying. That's not the first video I've seen this week of someone dying. There's a young woman who died on a bus recently this week. Oh, right, right. And to watch such horrors on a screen, it almost feels like a movie, but it's not, and it's real life. And I think that that's tragic, or even thinking about 9-11. And the fact that I was a young child, probably around six years old, who saw that on the TV, right? And that it... Well, the thing would become, we become desensitized to it. And I remember reading somewhere, I know I got this somewhere, but the average kid by the time he's five is seen something like 2,000 murders. Oh, what? Watching TV. Oh, you know, on TV? Oh, sure. Right? So they're seeing people killed, people beaten, people mugged, people raped on TV. And you get these sensitized to what happens in real life. And then when I see it on TV, well, but it's still... It's on TV, right? So maybe it's not real. So we get these sensitized to it. So it's crazy. It's just crazy. Yeah, I think that to the author's point, it's too simple. It's too reductionist to say it's phones. We just keep scapegoating kind of phones and screens in social media. I think that there's a lot of reasons why we are... why we are seeing this trend in our children, right? Our parenting has gotten gentle and permissive. Mm-hmm. Yeah. We've deferred parenting to specialists instead of keeping it really solidly in the home. If you were expecting the school to be the one to instill virtue in your child, we need to rethink that, right? That it's your job as a primary educator of your children. So... Not going to happen. Right. All right. So let's we need to take a break. You're listening to Mary Jen Hinderrd with Doug Hinderrd, licensed marriage and family therapist and all around good guy daughter, good girl daughter, Monica licensed clinical professional counselor. Talking about... And we're going to start talking about the how to it, right? How to instill honesty and self-control in your children, which is the most predictive quality for having a happy and well-adjusted adulthood. So come back, love to hear your calls, if you're struggling with these issues, raising your kids, honesty or self-control. Give us a call, let's talk about a triple eight, nine, one, four, nine, one, four, nine. Or if you raised children who turned out really well, how did you teach them to be honest and how did you teach them to have self-control and defer gratification, which is part of self-control? Real problem with you until they're not deferring gratification. That's a pretty tough thing. All right. Triple eight, nine, one, four, nine, one, four, nine. We'll be back in a minute. This is Mayor John Hinderd. I really enjoy your show, especially when Monica is on. Here's your host, Doug Hinderd. I love that rejoining Gavin. Thank you, my friend. It is going to take a lot of love. That's what we need is more love. Patula Clark had that great song back in the day. What the world needs now is love, sweet love. I was a teenager, I think, when she released that and it was true, then it's true now. So that little voice over there, was that didn't sound like your mother? No, it really didn't. No. We're having a fan for last week. That's great. Wow. Yeah. Flattered. Yeah. Well, I'm a little jealous. I mean, nobody calls me. I love Doug. That's, I doubt that. I love you. Mm-hmm. It's okay. No, parents always happy when their children are, you know, meet with good things. Hey, you're listening to Mayor John Hinderd. Thursday with Monica talking about raising children with honesty and self-control, how important that is. So do we need to beat up cell phones anymore or smartphones? Are we okay with that? Can we move on? I think we have, I think it's clear. Well, you know the motto. Don't make it clearer. Once it's clear, don't make it clearer. All right. So let's move on then. Let's talk about honesty and self-controls virtues that must be taught. As a society, when a doctor sacks, we are failing to teach these virtues as a society. Most parents are not teaching them authoritatively at home. He comes back to this authoritative thing a couple of times. And most public schools don't emphasize teaching content areas rather than character. Some parents are doing better than others, he says. I have to conduct in a large nationwide survey. Gallup, found, Gallup's economist Jonathan Rothwell. Let's see, found the parents who are very politically conservative or most likely have strong loving authoritative relationships with their children. The kind of relationships most likely to give rise to kids who are honest and self-control. That doesn't mean you have to be politically conservative. But maybe you do need a parent with the confidence of a politically conservative parent. Not sure understand that, but yeah. You need confident and authoritative parents, right? So he says, as he's previously observed, you now find that parents who are politically left of center are more likely to practice gentle parenting and more likely to affirm that good parenting means letting kids decide in some of their permissive practices. And he thoughts on that, Ms. Monica? Not permissive practices? Yeah, I'm not permissive practices. We let the kids decide. You know? Yes and no. I think that it, gosh, it would be so easy. And it's probably, it's so easy to be one of the other, right? And to say, well, we let them decide everything or nothing. And instead of just kind of walking that fine line and that balance of recognizing when it is appropriate for them to make decisions or when this is an opportunity for their growth and their decision-making development, or when you have to put your foot down, right? And be the parent sometimes. And so I think it would be easy for us to say be one or the other, but the truth is you have to be both. Yeah. And it's hard to know where the line is to be sure, right? And I think there's, for a lot of folks, there's a lot of parents. There's a fear of being disliked. Like if I make rules or if I have, really, and I've had parents who said, you really mean I can tell my kid they can't have their smartphone in their bedroom. You're like, I'm like, yes, you can do that. They're like, oh, I didn't think I could do that. Well, what do you mean you didn't think you could do that? Who paid for the smartphone? Who paid for the bedroom, right? Yeah. Yeah, just stop it. So anyway, I think parents oftentimes are afraid to parent now, right? So and this wasn't the case 30 years ago according to Dr. Sachs, authoritative parents understand that good parenting means adults are in charge, loving district, but yeah, the adult, you're in charge or the adult, you know better than the child. And of course the child is going to push back, but that's okay. Yeah, I mean, I think that we have to be okay with there being kind of a fight sometimes or a wrestling or a misunderstanding. Your kid's not going to understand everything you do. I mean, they lack the the wisdom that you have through the years in which you've lived. It doesn't make you infallible as parents, right? I think that's important to acknowledge, but we've talked about that in the show in the past. I mean, part of your child learning honesty is going to be through you being honest and part of being honest is owning your mistakes and asking for forgiveness and these different things that our child is going to see. You want a conscientious child. You have to be conscientious. Yeah, you got a model of behavior, which we're going to get to here in a minute when we start talking about the how to to raise these kids. But yeah, I think, yeah, it just parents should know. Listen, children come into this world 100%. Correct me if you do it if you disagree. Please 100% selfish. Well, a newborn care doesn't care about you at all. All the newborn wants it to be fed and give me a dry diaper. Right? Yeah. And so the entire process, I think of raising children is one of teaching them how to not be selfish. You know, we see it. We see it with your little nieces and nephews and my grandchildren, but one of them is playing with a toy and comes and takes it. Right? Well, okay, that's normal behavior for a two year old three year old four year old. Normal behavior. But then we've got to say, okay, that's not how we behave and we teach them how not to be selfish and how to share it, etc. Right. So your children will always rebel against rules and boundaries because they don't want them. Nobody wants them. But we know rules and boundaries. If you live without rules and boundaries, you're setting yourself up for a miserable existence as an adult. Right. Well, I think helping your children kind of embrace that is where they're going to grow in that self control, right? We have to teach our children to make decisions for what is good, not for what feels good. And that requires self control and discipline and self mastery and self denial and all of these things. A little six. We start to learn early in life through sharing at recess and everything, but also through our parents modeling those behaviors. Yeah. Your mother did a good job of modeling sharing and I was very happy. All right. So let's talk about the how to. Shall we do that? Let's do it. You want to do honesty first or you want to do self control? Honesty. I want to do self control. Great. I'll put that off because I'm in control and we'll do it. You want which is honesty? I mean, I love it. Thank you. Honesty. Let's define it. It's the quality of being truthful in words, actions and intentions. Right. So not just what you say and do, but actually what you intend as well. It means not to see, not deceiving, not stealing and not hiding the truth for selfish gain. Okay. Not manipulating. So I get what I want. It involves authenticity too, right? Being the same person in public is your own private. Like I am what I am, right? I don't put on a public facade, right? And then I go home. I'm like this bearer of a guy, right? So cataclysm teaches us that honesty is part of the eighth commandment. You should not bear false witness, which calls us to live truthfully and thought word indeed, right? Honesty is closer tied to integrity, right? Which is unity of heart and word under God's truth. Makes sense? I'm with you. You're clear. Clear. You agree? Yes. Okay. All right. So number one, number one. Model honesty yourself. You have to do it. You have to do honesty, right? Children watch more than they listen, well, that's the truth. And if they see you keeping your word, admitting mistakes and speaking truth with kindness, they will learn to do the same, right? Yeah. I mean, I think you just, you just, that's the whole A Lincoln thing, right? Avoid little white lies, right? Things like, you answer the phone, tell them I'm not here. Yeah. You know, right? Right? Kids pick up on that stuff quickly, then it's okay to tell a little white lie if it furthers whatever it is I'm trying to do, right? So you got to be honest in all, in everything that you say and do, right? And even at the grocery store, right? If you find, and I know your mother's done this a couple times, find that something ended up in your cart that didn't get paid for, you know, somehow just got missed or whatever and also didn't you discover it and you're like, turn around and go back in and say, hey, you didn't charge me for this. I remember one time she knew when I was there and the cashier like tipped over. I mean, yeah, dumbfounded. Yeah, dumbfounded. I like, wait a minute, but you were in the parking lot already. Yeah, I didn't pay for it though. And I'm not doing that, you know. What I, in fact, I think your mother's quote was, yeah, I'm not going to hell for, you know, a bottle of soda or whatever, whatever it was, right? I'm not, yeah, I'm not going, this bag of cookies. Yeah, I'm not going to hell for my cookies. Right. So, all right. Number two, I think this is important. Which, the value of truth, which means you have to talk about it. You have to say, listen, in this family, we are honest and truthful people that you're a member of the Smith family, the Hinderer family, we're honest, period, right? So you got to talk about it, right? You got to let them know that honesty is a virtue, right? Truth is a gift from God living honestly shows respect for ourselves and others. And I think it's important if we're going to speak about it sincerely, would be sharing that honesty is difficult and it's uncomfortable and sometimes like, you know, why wouldn't we go back into the sort of pay for something cool? Because it's embarrassing maybe or because it does or it's that. And I think, you know, our children have to be prepared for these good things to be difficult and for a lot of feelings to come up, like just because it's the right thing to do or a good thing to do doesn't mean it feels good. Right. That's exactly right. And if we're managed by our emotions, then if it's difficult, I can do it. That's where self control comes in, right? Right. Which is why I think you should make your bed. Why should you make your bed every morning? Because you don't want to. That's the reason why you should do it. Right. Right. Let's see, honesty strengthens relationships. People feel safe when they know you're an honest person. And so I think you got to, and one of the things that people talk about sometimes is coming up with a family mission and value statement, right? And write it down and put it on the refrigerator. Who are we? We're a happy family, right? Are we a happy family? Darn right. We are. For minds you of where you're trying to go and heart it. Exactly. Right. So I think truth is one of those things that's at the top of the list. We tell the truth even if it's difficult. Okay. All right. And then I think encourage honesty with safety, right? I mean, you have to enforce it and you have to adjust the violations. And there are consequences, right? When a child tells the truth, reinforce it, right? Support it, etc. Create a home environment where children feel safe to admit they did something wrong. Right. Right. And it comes a, I lied about this. And they don't have to worry about, you know, getting beat or grounded for the next 27 years, right? So I'm going to give a shout out to my mother, no, because I remember I was probably around six maybe. And we were visiting one of her sisters. And her sister had a Mickey Mouse pencil. And I took it because I wanted it. Yeah. Right? So we're driving home and she looks over and I'm playing with this Mickey Mouse pencil. Where do you get that? Well, I got it in an Audrey sauce. Breaks reverse turn around back to an Audrey sauce. She put her arm around me, took me up to the door and I had to give it back to an Audrey. Okay. I remember my brother who family gathering in the men are all sitting around playing poker. Right? And a little bit later in the evening, he walks past my mother in his pockets or jingling with coins. Right? And he was like probably five or six. And my mother says, son, where'd you get that money from that table over there? And he was just reaching up and taking coin. Yeah. Turn the boy around to come on to the table. Gentlemen, my son has something to say to you. And he had to give back the money, right? Right. But that's what you want. And he kept him when they're stealing nickels and pencils and let him know. That's how we behave. That's what we do. We take it back. We return it. And you're okay. I still love you, right? And I'm here with you to support you to do the right things. You know how to do it, right? So good job, mom. Did his day nailed it. Nailed it. I'm very honest. Unbelievable. So, and I think the other thing is, we're running the confession. You know, it's God's gift to help us to return to honesty. And we need to be honest in the confessional. Right. And there's to be honest. And it's really hard sometimes to be honest. You know, depending on what's on your conscience, this could be a pretty difficult thing. Sure. So, there you go. All right. So, model it. Talk about it. Put it on the refrigerator as a family value. And then enforce it. And there are consequences when there's violations. And you know, and it's with the right mindset, when kids mess up in the area of honesty, we should be excited about it. Not that we tell them we're excited. But this is a goal and opportunity to teach them a really important virtue. So we're unhangered. We'd be like, all right, good. Okay. Now I got a chance because he's returning a pencil rather than, you know, a $3.00 stereo from the store. Oh, yeah, yeah. Yeah. I mean, absolutely. Like, if we can correct little things, that's great. You know, and we're seeing it. And also, like, truthfully, if your child is lying or something, to some degree, they're conscience is well formed enough to know that what they did was wrong, right? Because if they didn't think it was wrong, they probably wouldn't have hidden it or they wouldn't have been dishonest. And so you're like, okay, step in the right direction. They knew that was wrong. Now next step is helping them kind of own that process or avoid doing that in the future. And so again, if we can kind of see just raising our children is just this process. And that it's all normal. It's all part of the process. We don't have to be worried about it. And we just had to take it one day at a time. Correct. Every kid's going to steal something. Most of them. You know, right? They just don't... All right. Hey, listen to Mary-Jun Hinderd with Doug Hinder, License Marriage Family, therapist, Monica, daughter, License, Clinical, Professional, Council, talking about how to raise kids to be honest and to have self-control, which they need both of those things to have good productive adults. Taking your calls, eight, eight, nine, one, four, nine, one, four, nine. I'm going to take a break. We'll be back in a minute. This is Marriage Unhinderd. Here's your host, Doug Hinderd. Catholic families kick off into school year, join us in entertaining, entrusting students and educators to a loving care of the Blessed Virgin Mother through the power of the Rosary. Go to our website and find out how your family can be featured on our family rosary back to school photo album. Want a daily rosary reminder? Text Pray to 914914. That number's pretty familiar. Let's pray to 914914. Join us at 7pm Central for Family Rosary across America, Real Madrid, with, by the Rocky, as we bring our back to school focus back to prayer. There we go. All right. So you're with Doug and Monica talking about how to teach our children honesty and self-control. All right. So before we get that, we got a caller. So we're going to take our caller and then we'll get back to our content. So let's go down to San Antonio Carlos. Hello, Carlos. Yes, hi, I have a question. It may be off-road, not relevant, but cradle Catholic family of 11, my 24-year-old baptized and confirmed Catholic daughter left the church and she wants to get married outside the church. She doesn't really want to get a dispensation and she wants to get married outside the church. I don't know what that denomination is. My question is, should we attend the wedding and the other question is, is there going to go ahead and go with a so-called marriage? Can we attend a birthday party or something a month later if they invite? Yeah. Good question. Good question. So let me ask you this. I mean, are you convinced that she was raised in the faith that she knows her faith? And I mean, were you regular church and talk about faith and all that kind of stuff? So does she know that what she's doing is sinful? That's what I have told her. Yeah, we've all been Catholic all our lives and very faithful and she, you know, when she was leaving the church, I said you realize that, you know, from this point on, you will never be able to receive our Lord unless you go to confession and return to the church. Okay. And she says, I know. Okay. Yeah. All right. So here's how I look at this. And I will tell you, I've got a family member in a similar situation who spoke to a number of priests who got the opposite advice of how I see it. Right? And so she talked to her priest who said, yeah, you can go to the ceremony and you don't want to alienate it, etc., etc. Here's how I see it. I see it that you cannot participate in something that's sinful. Okay. And if she knows that getting married outside the church is sinful, then in my opinion, you can't really be a part of that. If she doesn't know it's sinful, if she wasn't well-formed, if she wasn't well trained, if she doesn't really know her faith, well, then maybe she doesn't know it's sinful. But if she knows it's sinful, my thought is you can't really participate in that. But you will find priests who will have a very different opinion about that. But in my opinion, you can't participate. That would be how I would do it if one of my kids, I'll get married outside the church and I'd say, I just, I love you to death and I just can't be a part of it. So, now, but with that said, once they're married, I think you still have to love them to death. And I think, yeah, you still go to the birthday parties. You have them over for dinner on Sundays and you have a good time with them because you want them to come back to the church and so you want them to be part of the family. So you can't participate in the sin, but you can still participate in their life and have them participate in yours. That's how I see it. Monica thought. Yeah. Because I would take this to your prayer and I would go to a priest and a spiritual director to help you wrestle and discern because you also have to be true to your conscience. And so, you know, if it feels wrong to go and you're like, ah, this is just not, it's not feeling right, then, you know, you have to be true. You have to answer to your conscience. And so, some people are going to decide not to go to the wedding itself but go to the reception right into celebrating or participate in a life event, celebrate that. Other people are going to, you know, pray and go to both and some people are going to pray and go to neither. Like, you know, there's options. But I think that what I would really emphasize is communication with your daughter in regards to how much you love her so that she knows that this was not a decision made out of anger or spite or, you know, religious, conservative, like whatever she wants to paint it as, that she knows that you are lovingly and prayerfully discerning how to love her best and she needs to know that. Yeah, I find the Simon Talks sometimes that, you know, sometimes the most loving thing you can say to somebody is no, like, no, I can't be part of this because I love you. It's because I love you that I can't be a part of this. So, yeah, but I agree. Pray about it. Consolid priest and then, but, you know, Bishop Sheen used to say you may not do evil even for a good reason. Right. And so, if in your mind going to this wedding would be an evil thing, you can't do it even for the good reason of maintaining good relationships with your daughter. So, does that make sense, Carlos? Thank you so much. You're welcome. Sorry you're in that situation, my friend, but a lot of people are. And that's how I see it. But there's still a lot of confusion. And, you know, you talk to different people. You're going to get different answers on that one. So, to your point, you got to follow your conscience. All right. All right. All right, I'm blessed. Okay. You're welcome, Carlos. All right. So, on to self control in the eight minutes we have left. All right. So, again, self control is the capacity to regulate your impulses instead of being ruled by them. Okay. I allow this person to pause before reacting, choosing long term good over short term gratification. Let me repeat that, choosing the long term good over the short term gratification. And to act with discipline. And Paul, this is one of the fruits of the Holy Spirit. The cataclysm connects it with the virtue of temperance, okay, which is the regulation of our concupisable appetites. Didn't know I could pronounce it. We're did you? Kind, cupisable, kind, that's five syllables. Good job. All right. I got it. All right. So, how do we do it? Well, number one, model it, teach, model it. You have to do it, right? Children imitate what they see. So show patients when driving, I struggle with that one. Calmness when frustrated, right? So if you're frustrated, don't pound your fist on the table and discipline your habits, right? Let them see you pause, take a deep breath in your upset. Okay. So you got to model self control. Yeah. I think that the cataclysm church again has a little bit of a leg up on this and that we have recommended days of fasting and require days of fasting in which we, we, we, we model and participate as a community in self control and in self denial and that that's not a bad thing. And, you know, we, when we can normalize that and not have it be such a big deal when we have to exercise that in little ways and then eventually in life in big ways, it feels normal. It feels like, yeah, this is a part of life that I, I know I'm capable of doing because I've done it before. Yeah. There you go. All right. So consistent with what we talked about with honesty, right? So you have to model it and then you have to teach it. You have to talk about it, right? You know, and the cataclysm explains it's self mastery is a long and exacting work, right? As I said earlier, children come into this world with no self mastery with no self control, right? It's all about just give me what I want. All right. And it's, but, but self control delayed gratification is a virtue is a core for a lot of other virtues that come after that like charity prunes and temperance. So I think you could even a little kids practice little waiting games like, okay, let's wait five minutes before we eat this snack. Okay. Well, let's just practice that for a minute, right? Or first we finish our homework and then we play. Well, I heard that like every day of my life growing up. Now you can't go to play finish homework. I hate homework. Lents a good time, right? So, but tie the delay like this whole five minutes for we to snack thing, but tie it to an intention. Like, let's, let's wait five minutes. It's offered this five minutes up for your brother that he passes his test, right? Or something like that. Let's tie it to a supernatural perspective, right? And practice self control with children in everyday situations like, you know, waiting, standing in line or following different routines. Okay. So talk about it and then play these little waiting games. Yeah. And I think it could also be interesting to look, we all love a good hero or a good role model, a good example. And I think it's important to, to show our children both spiritual and secular examples of this. You cannot show me one successful person in our world, whether it be, you know, in athletics or in any business who hasn't had to be in control of themselves and deny themselves and say, no, you know, you're no open to order further. Yes, it's an, and to be able to see that like, hey, when we can deny ourselves, when we can work hard, when we can endure, good things come. Mm-hmm. Yeah, exactly. Exactly. I mean, yeah. You wouldn't get a college degree if you couldn't defer gratification, right? You wouldn't go to school. Right. Well, and I think that we used to see this a lot on TV. And I don't know if we do anymore that the, the good guy prevailed in these good virtues prevailed in these Westerns where, you know, the cowboy was, you know, the cowboy was controlled and he, you know, was a conscientious person contributing to society. And so sometimes we need to give our kids examples beyond just the parents that they can kind of aspire to. One of my favorite Westerns was the tales of Wells Fargo. And so this Wells Fargo detective had to go find the people who stole the money, right? And in every episode, he was faced with a moral dilemma where he could have taken the easy route or done what was right. And in every episode, he did what was right. Tales of Wells Fargo. I'm trying to think who the actor was, but he's a big name. So that's a good one there. Okay. Number three, said clear boundaries and consequences. All right. So be consistent with the limits. So you put a limit on screen time, limit on video games, limit on whatever, right? Or your chores need to be done at this time. You set your limits. And the kid, then you let the kid do it. And if he fails, then there's a consequence. Whatever the consequence is that you've determined ahead of time, right? Yeah. Yeah. Well, I like it. Okay, good. Good examples. Well, yeah, you never had many. Well, you had lots of consequences. No, you had lots of boundaries. You push boundaries. Yeah, it's important to. I push boundaries. Yeah, it is. I mean, it's every kid is going to in their own way. Yeah. They're testing the limits and they're understanding. And it's in that pushback that they learn and they develop. And I think it's good. And I personally think it's a healthy thing to do. Parents have to be ready for that, but. Well, that's part of my point. You got to anticipate what's coming down the pike and get ready. So you need to anticipate the fact that my kid is going to lie to me. I decide to date when I'm going to do when you lie to me in six months. Right. And then I'm going to handle it the right way, right? Well, I know that my kid's going to be lazy or they're not going to make their bed or whatever it is. Now I know how I'm going to handle it. All right. And they give them some tools for managing emotions like, you know, when they're really mad, you know, count to 10 thing or I'd take three deep breaths or let's say a quick prayer, right? And then encourage them. I know you're going to like this. Encourage them to name their feelings. Like I'm feeling really angry now or I'm feeling anxious or I'm feeling sad, right? So naming it helps to tame it, name it, you tame it. And it helps kids get in touch with their emotions. Yeah. Because when we name things, we take ownership of it. And this is like an understanding the church has had for a long time. And we name something we can, we can own it. And so when I can name my feelings, I no longer are a part of me and all consuming rather something that I can interact with in a much different way. Yeah. So there you go. All right. So listen, thanks for being part of the show. We're almost out of time. Thanks for having me. It's always good to have you here. So hopefully folks, a couple of ideas on how you can help your kids grow and honesty and self-control, which is really, really, really, really, really, really, really, really, really important. Really, really, really. All right. I'm excited with the memoraries we always do. But today, let's, let's offer the memorari again for Charlie Kirk, for their pose of his soul, for comfort for his wife and his kids, for everyone who lost their lives on 9-11. And for the school shooting for last week, this has been a terrible few 7-8-9 days of shooting deaths and tragedies. So let's, let's ask our blessed mother to bring some level of comfort to everyone who's been affected by this. We're almost graces, Virgin Mary, that never was it known that anyone who flooded that protection implored that help or sought the intercession was left unated. Inspired of this confidence, we've flited the Overgent of virgins, our mother to thee, to we come before thee, we stand sinful and sorrowful. The mother of the word incarnate despised not our petitions, but in the mercy here and answer us, amen. So Sunday is the feast of the exaltation of Holy Cross. So tomorrow we're going to deal with matrimonial crosses and how to carry the cross that your spouse hands you from time to time. Not that I have any real life examples of that, but I know your mother does, but she's not going to call them to the show. So I can make up whatever I want to. So we're going to talk about matrimonial crosses tomorrow. Thanks so much for being part of the show. There's a solution. Everything is troubling your marriages. Join those solutions right here, money through Friday, 5 p.m. central time. I hope to see you tomorrow. Have a good night.